How was life of pastoral groups sustained?
 So we see that the life of these pastoral groups was sustained by a careful consideration of a host of factors. Young men came to be recognised as members of the warrior class when they proved their manliness by raiding the cattle of other pastoral groups and participating in wars. Environmentalists and economists have increasingly come to recognise that pastoral nomadism is a form of life that is perfectly suited to many hilly and dry regions of the world.  How did the life of pastoralists change under colonial rule?  Like the Maasai, other pastoral groups were also forced to live within the confines of special reserves. It is through raids that the power of different pastoral groups was asserted.  Banjaras were yet another well-known group of graziers. Even today, over 22 million Africans depend on some form of pastoral activity for their livelihood. They had to judge how long the herds could stay in one area, and know where they could find water and pasture. They had to set up a relationship with farmers on the way, so that the herds could graze in harvested fields and manure the soil.  When Pastures Dry  Drought affects the life of pastoralists everywhere. How did pastoral communities elsewhere cope with these changes in the modern world?  This pattern of cyclical movement between summer and winter pastures was typical of many pastoral communities of the Himalayas, including the Bhotiyas, Sherpas and Kinnauris. In many other parts of the world, new laws and settlement patterns forced pastoral communities to alter their lives. They needed to calculate the timing of their movements, and ensure that they could move through different territories.  Dhangars were an important pastoral community of Maharashtra.  Like pastoralists in India, the lives of African pastoralists have changed dramatically over the colonial and post-colonial periods.  But the life history of the poor pastoralists who depended only on their livestock was different. They combined a range of different activities – cultivation, trade, and herding – to make their living. It was seen as ‘waste land’ that needed to be brought under cultivation. White settlers and European colonists saw pastoralists as dangerous and savage – people with whom all contact had to be minimised. Through these Acts some forests which produced commercially valuable timber like deodar or sal were declared ‘Reserved’.  Pastoralism in Africa  Let us move to Africa where over half the world’s pastoral population lives. Other forests were classified as ‘Protected’. One group of Raikas – known as the Maru (desert) Raikas – herded camels and another group reared sheep and goat. In pre-colonial times Maasai society was divided into two social categories – elders and warriors.