How did forest acts change the lives of pastoralists
 Like pastoralists in India, the lives of African pastoralists have changed dramatically over the colonial and post-colonial periods.  How did the life of pastoralists change under colonial rule? They change the paths of their annual movement, reduce their cattle numbers, press for rights to enter new areas, exert political pressure on the government for relief, subsidy and other forms of support and demand a right in the management of forests and water resources.  The new territorial boundaries and restrictions imposed on them suddenly changed the lives of pastoralists.  These Forest Acts changed the lives of pastoralists.  But the life history of the poor pastoralists who depended only on their livestock was different.  Colonial Rule and Pastoral Life  Under colonial rule, the life of pastoralists changed dramatically. When pasturelands in one place was closed to them, they changed the direction of their movement, reduced the size of the herd, combined pastoral activity with other forms of income and adapted to the changes in the modern world. They had to move because the Forest Department permits that had been issued to them now ruled their lives. Unlike the mountain pastoralists, it was not the cold and the snow that defined the seasonal rhythms of their movement: rather it was the alternation of the monsoon and dry season.  In the deserts of Rajasthan lived the Raikas.  Second, by the mid-nineteenth century, various Forest Acts were also being enacted in the different provinces.  When Pastures Dry  Drought affects the life of pastoralists everywhere. The timing of their entry and departure was specified, and the number of days they could spend in the forest was limited. All of them had to adjust to seasonal changes and make effective use of available pastures in different places.  Conclusion  So we see that pastoral communities in different parts of the world are affected in a variety of different ways by changes in the modern world. How did pastoral communities elsewhere cope with these changes in the modern world? Second, a new distinction between the wealthy and poor pastoralists developed.  Pastoralists reacted to these changes in a variety of ways. Most often, they did not have the resources to tide over bad times. They needed a permit for entry.  Such changes were not experienced only by pastoral communities in India. They were now prevented from entering many forests that had earlier provided valuable forage for their cattle. In the dry season they moved to the coastal tracts, and left when the rains came.  Like the Maasai, other pastoral groups were also forced to live within the confines of special reserves. New laws and new borders affect the patterns of their movement.
