How did pastoralists adapt to modern times?
Modern  Yet, pastoralists do adapt to new times. When pasturelands in one place was closed to them, they changed the direction of their movement, reduced the size of the herd, combined pastoral activity with other forms of income and adapted to the changes in the modern world. Most often, they did not have the resources to tide over bad times. This nomadism allows them to survive bad times and avoid crises. How did pastoral communities elsewhere cope with these changes in the modern world?  How did the life of pastoralists change under colonial rule? They combined a range of different activities – cultivation, trade, and herding – to make their living. It was seen as ‘waste land’ that needed to be brought under cultivation. White settlers and European colonists saw pastoralists as dangerous and savage – people with whom all contact had to be minimised. Through these Acts some forests which produced commercially valuable timber like deodar or sal were declared ‘Reserved’.  Pastoralism in Africa  Let us move to Africa where over half the world’s pastoral population lives. Other forests were classified as ‘Protected’. One group of Raikas – known as the Maru (desert) Raikas – herded camels and another group reared sheep and goat. In pre-colonial times Maasai society was divided into two social categories – elders and warriors.  Further to the east, in Garhwal and Kumaon, the Gujjar cattle herders came down to the dry forests of the bhabar in the winter, and went up to the high meadows – the bugyals – in summer. All of them had to adjust to seasonal changes and make effective use of available pastures in different places. They needed to calculate the timing of their movements, and ensure that they could move through different territories. The timing of their entry and departure was specified, and the number of days they could spend in the forest was limited.  How Did the Pastoralists Cope with these Changes? How? After the kharif harvest was cut at this time, the fields had to be fertilised and made ready for the rabi harvest. By end September the Bakarwals were on the move again, this time on their downward journey, back to their winter base. In times of war and famine, they lost nearly everything. Environmentalists and economists have increasingly come to recognise that pastoral nomadism is a form of life that is perfectly suited to many hilly and dry regions of the world. In pre-colonial times, the Maasai pastoralists had dominated their agricultural neighbours both economically and politically. Before colonial times, Maasailand stretched over a vast area from north Kenya to the steppes of northern Tanzania.
