Model directory: /home/aman/.local/share/bllipparser/WSJ-PTB3
Model directory already exists, not reinstalling
(3323, 10) (3323,) (713, 10) (713,)
num_boost_rounds=150

Training XGBoost ...

Predicting with XGBoost ...
5 Explain the authorities of the elders and warriors of the Maasai society
This is prev: 
'ascii' codec can't decode byte 0xe2 in position 0: ordinal not in range(128)
'ascii' codec can't decode byte 0xe2 in position 0: ordinal not in range(128)
Error during conversion
stdout: {}
stderr: {}
Invalid PTB tree: ''
Explain the authorities of the elders and warriors of the Maasai society
Consequently, the traditional authority of both elders and warriors was adversely affected. They, however, were subject to the authority of the elders. First, the traditional difference based on age, between the elders and warriors, was disturbed, though it did not break down entirely.  As the area of grazing lands shrank, the adverse effect of the droughts increased in intensity. With the onset of the monsoon the Dhangars left the Konkan and the coastal areas with their flocks and returned to their settlements on the dry plateau. They appointed chiefs of different sub-groups of Maasai, who were made responsible for the affairs of the tribe. When pasturelands in one place was closed to them, they changed the direction of their movement, reduced the size of the herd, combined pastoral activity with other forms of income and adapted to the changes in the modern world. Unlike the mountain pastoralists, it was not the cold and the snow that defined the seasonal rhythms of their movement: rather it was the alternation of the monsoon and dry season. With the onset of summer, the snow melted and the mountainsides were lush green.  In the deserts of Rajasthan lived the Raikas. They change the paths of their annual movement, reduce their cattle numbers, press for rights to enter new areas, exert political pressure on the government for relief, subsidy and other forms of support and demand a right in the management of forests and water resources.  To administer the affairs of the Maasai, the British introduced a series of measures that had important implications. The elders formed the ruling group and met in periodic councils to decide on the affairs of the community and settle disputes. In winter, when the high mountains were covered with snow, they lived with their herds in the low hills of the Siwalik range. They crossed the Pir Panjal passes and entered the valley of Kashmir. By the end of colonial rule the situation had reversed.  The social changes in Maasai society occurred at two levels. So expansion of cultivation inevitably meant the decline of pastures and a problem for pastoralists.  The loss of the finest grazing lands and water resources created pressure on the small area of land that the Maasai were confined within. The frequent bad years led to a steady decline of the animal stock of the pastoralists.  One of the problems the Maasais have faced is the continuous loss of their grazing lands.  In a different area of the mountains, the Gaddi shepherds of Himachal Pradesh had a similar cycle of seasonal movement. The warriors consisted of younger people, mainly responsible for the protection of the tribe. Young men came to be recognised as members of the warrior class when they proved their manliness by raiding the cattle of other pastoral groups and participating in wars. After 1947, the camel and sheep herding Raikas, for instance, could no longer move into Sindh and graze their camels on the banks of the Indus, as they had done earlier. Pastoral Nomads and their Movements  In the Mountains  Even today the Gujjar Bakarwals of Jammu and Kashmir are great herders of goat and sheep.
