They, however, were subject to the authority of the elders. The warriors consisted of younger people, mainly responsible for the protection of the tribe.  To administer the affairs of the Maasai, the British introduced a series of measures that had important implications.  As the area of grazing lands shrank, the adverse effect of the droughts increased in intensity. They appointed chiefs of different sub-groups of Maasai, who were made responsible for the affairs of the tribe.  But the life history of the poor pastoralists who depended only on their livestock was different. When pasturelands in one place was closed to them, they changed the direction of their movement, reduced the size of the herd, combined pastoral activity with other forms of income and adapted to the changes in the modern world. Consequently, the traditional authority of both elders and warriors was adversely affected. With the onset of summer, the snow melted and the mountainsides were lush green. In winter, when the high mountains were covered with snow, they lived with their herds in the low hills of the Siwalik range. They change the paths of their annual movement, reduce their cattle numbers, press for rights to enter new areas, exert political pressure on the government for relief, subsidy and other forms of support and demand a right in the management of forests and water resources. With the onset of the monsoon the Dhangars left the Konkan and the coastal areas with their flocks and returned to their settlements on the dry plateau. After 1947, the camel and sheep herding Raikas, for instance, could no longer move into Sindh and graze their camels on the banks of the Indus, as they had done earlier.  One of the problems the Maasais have faced is the continuous loss of their grazing lands. The elders formed the ruling group and met in periodic councils to decide on the affairs of the community and settle disputes. Unlike the mountain pastoralists, it was not the cold and the snow that defined the seasonal rhythms of their movement: rather it was the alternation of the monsoon and dry season.  In a different area of the mountains, the Gaddi shepherds of Himachal Pradesh had a similar cycle of seasonal movement. The frequent bad years led to a steady decline of the animal stock of the pastoralists. In the decades between the 1850s and 1880s the right to collect the tax was auctioned out to contractors.  The loss of the finest grazing lands and water resources created pressure on the small area of land that the Maasai were confined within. The number of cattle heads he had and the amount of tax he paid was entered on the pass.  In the deserts of Rajasthan lived the Raikas. Young men came to be recognised as members of the warrior class when they proved their manliness by raiding the cattle of other pastoral groups and participating in wars. By the end of colonial rule the situation had reversed. They had to set up a relationship with farmers on the way, so that the herds could graze in harvested fields and manure the soil. Only buffaloes liked the swampy, wet conditions of the coastal areas during the monsoon months.
