Explain the warriors
First, the traditional difference based on age, between the elders and warriors, was disturbed, though it did not break down entirely. They defended the community and organised cattle raids. The warriors consisted of younger people, mainly responsible for the protection of the tribe. They combined a range of different activities – cultivation, trade, and herding – to make their living. It was seen as ‘waste land’ that needed to be brought under cultivation. White settlers and European colonists saw pastoralists as dangerous and savage – people with whom all contact had to be minimised. Through these Acts some forests which produced commercially valuable timber like deodar or sal were declared ‘Reserved’.  Pastoralism in Africa  Let us move to Africa where over half the world’s pastoral population lives. Other forests were classified as ‘Protected’. One group of Raikas – known as the Maru (desert) Raikas – herded camels and another group reared sheep and goat. In pre-colonial times Maasai society was divided into two social categories – elders and warriors.  Further to the east, in Garhwal and Kumaon, the Gujjar cattle herders came down to the dry forests of the bhabar in the winter, and went up to the high meadows – the bugyals – in summer. Young men came to be recognised as members of the warrior class when they proved their manliness by raiding the cattle of other pastoral groups and participating in wars. Consequently, the traditional authority of both elders and warriors was adversely affected. These contractors tried to extract as high a tax as they could to recover the money they had paid to the state and earn as much profit as they could within the year.  First, the colonial state wanted to transform all grazing lands into cultivated farms.  Where have the Grazing Lands Gone? They needed a permit for entry. So the Raikas combined cultivation with pastoralism. Feeding the cattle became a persistent problem.  How Did these Changes Affect the Lives of Pastoralists?  How Did the Pastoralists Cope with these Changes? By September they began their return movement.  These Forest Acts changed the lives of pastoralists.  In the deserts of Rajasthan lived the Raikas. Pastoralists are not relics of the past.
